[filebeat] add enhanced fingerprint to filestream (#50566)
elastic/beats: docs/reference/filebeat/file-identity.md

| path | Files are never moved or renamed, file names are never re-used. | Simple and fast. | The most unstable option, requires to maintain immutable file paths. |
| native (default in Filebeat < 9.0) | Stable file systems, files < 64 bytes in size, ingestion without delays. | Low CPU / memory overhead. | Might cause data duplication or data loss if the file system provides unstable `inode` or `device ID` values. No support for network shares, containers or VMs.
| inode_marker | Same as `native` but `device ID` is changing. | Same as `native` + no dependency on `device ID`. | Can still cause data duplication or data loss due to unstable `inode` values provided by the file system. Also, no support for network shares, containers or VMs. |

> | fingerprint (default in Filebeat >= 9.0) | Log files with unique content. Since 9.5, files of any size (Enhanced Fingerprint); before 9.5, files larger than the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). | The most stable. Support for any OS, any file system, network shares, containers and VMs. Since 9.5, ingests files smaller than the fingerprint size without delay. | Slightly higher CPU / memory usage. Before 9.5, did not ingest files until they reached the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| fingerprint (default in Filebeat >= 9.0) | Log files with unique content.<br><br>{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+` Logs files of any size (enhanced fingerprint).<br><br> {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.0-9.4` Logs files larger than the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). | The most stable. Support for any OS, any file system, network shares, containers and VMs.<br><br>{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+` Ingests files smaller than the fingerprint size without delay. | Slightly higher CPU / memory usage.<br><br>{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.0-9.4` Only ingests files until they reach the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). |
```

> | fingerprint (default in Filebeat >= 9.0) | Log files with unique content. Since 9.5, files of any size larger than the `offset` (Enhanced Fingerprint); before 9.5, files larger than the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). | The most stable. Support for any OS, any file system, network shares, containers and VMs. Since 9.5, ingests files smaller than the fingerprint size without delay. | Slightly higher CPU / memory usage. Before 9.5, did not ingest files until they reached the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). |

Reviewer 2: The first part of the fingerprint use case is confusing:
> Log files with unique content. Since 9.5, files of any size larger than the `offset` (Enhanced Fingerprint)

I believe a better option is:
> Log files with unique content. Since 9.5, files of any size (Enhanced Fingerprint)

```suggestion
| fingerprint (default in Filebeat >= 9.0) | Log files with unique content. Since 9.5, files of any size (Enhanced Fingerprint); before 9.5, files larger than the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). | The most stable. Support for any OS, any file system, network shares, containers and VMs. Since 9.5, ingests files smaller than the fingerprint size without delay. | Slightly higher CPU / memory usage. Before 9.5, did not ingest files until they reached the fingerprint size (1 KB by default). |
```

Reviewer 3: Done in c02d42b7a2

This file identity covers most of the common use cases, it's OS-agnostic, it supports any file system including network shares, and it ensures that data duplication or data loss are avoided.

> Before 9.5, there was a trade off: this file identity delayed ingesting data from files smaller than the amount of bytes required to compute the fingerprint (`offset`+`length`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.0-9.4` Using this file identity delays ingesting data from files smaller than the amount of bytes required to compute the fingerprint (`offset`+`length`).
```

```{applies_to}
stack: ga 9.5.0
```

Enhanced Fingerprint, controlled by `file_identity.fingerprint.growing`, lets the filestream input track files that are smaller than the fingerprint size (`offset`+`length`) instead of skipping them until they grow large enough. It is enabled by default since 9.5.

While a file is smaller than `offset`+`length`, it is tracked using the raw bytes available from `offset` to the end of the file, and its identity follows the content as the file grows. Once the file reaches `offset`+`length`, its identity becomes the regular SHA-256 fingerprint — byte-for-byte identical to the value the static fingerprint produces for the same bytes — and its registry entry is migrated automatically. No data is re-ingested and no duplicate registry entries are created.

The practical effects are:

* Files smaller than the fingerprint size are ingested without delay.
* Deployments upgrading to 9.5 keep using their existing fingerprint registry entries. Files already at or above the fingerprint size are not re-ingested.
* Files smaller than `offset` still cannot be tracked, because there are no bytes to read past the offset.

> Enhanced Fingerprint is not supported with `rotation.external.strategy: copytruncate` and is automatically disabled for those inputs, so files smaller than `offset`+`length` are not ingested there until they reach that size.

Reviewer 4: I believe we found that fingerprint handles copytruncate, and added tests for it in https://github.com/elastic/beats/pull/50442. We should document that using this setting is unnecessary, instead of implying people have to choose between enhanced fingerprint and handling copytruncate rotation.

Reviewer 3: Handled in 34ab8802c0338e9295681ff64c914398a6b32a72

file_identity.fingerprint: ~
```

> Before 9.5, if a new log file appeared, the filestream input would not "see" it until it grew to 1056 bytes (`offset`+`length`). Files that never grew to that size were never ingested. Since 9.5, Enhanced Fingerprint removes this limitation by default (see [Enhanced Fingerprint](#file-identity-fingerprint-growing) below).

Reviewer: What if we rephrased this like this:

```suggestion
If a new log file appears, the filestream input doesn’t register it until it grows to 1056 bytes (`offset`+`length`). Files that don't grow to that size are not ingested.

{applies_to}`stack: ga 9.5+` This limitation is removed by default. Refer to [Enhanced fingerprint](#file-identity-fingerprint-growing) for details.
```

I think this would work because the first paragraph continues the use case mentioned in line 174, which we’re already marking with an in-line applies_to for the range between versions 9.0 and 9.4 (as the docs for 8.x versions are elsewhere). Then the second paragraph explains the behavior is different in 9.5

The stability of this file identity makes it a recommended and default option.

> #### Enhanced Fingerprint [file-identity-fingerprint-growing]

Reviewer: We use sentence case:

```suggestion
#### Enhanced fingerprint [file-identity-fingerprint-growing]
```

```{applies_to}

> stack: ga 9.5.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stack: ga 9.5.0+
```

```

> Enhanced Fingerprint, controlled by `file_identity.fingerprint.growing`, lets the filestream input track files that are smaller than the fingerprint size (`offset`+`length`) instead of skipping them until they grow large enough. It is enabled by default since 9.5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enhanced fingerprint, controlled by `file_identity.fingerprint.growing`, is enabled by default and lets the filestream input track files that are smaller than the fingerprint size (`offset`+`length`) instead of skipping them until they grow large enough.
```

While a file is smaller than `offset`+`length`, it is tracked using the raw bytes available from `offset` to the end of the file, and its identity follows the content as the file grows. Once the file reaches `offset`+`length`, its identity becomes the regular SHA-256 fingerprint — byte-for-byte identical to the value the static fingerprint produces for the same bytes — and its registry entry is migrated automatically. No data is re-ingested and no duplicate registry entries are created.

The practical effects are:

* Files smaller than the fingerprint size are ingested without delay.
* Deployments upgrading to 9.5 keep using their existing fingerprint registry entries. Files already at or above the fingerprint size are not re-ingested.
* Files smaller than `offset` still cannot be tracked, because there are no bytes to read past the offset.

::::{warning}
Rolling back from Filebeat 9.5 or later to an earlier version can duplicate events for small files.

> The risk is limited to files that the newer Filebeat version had started reading, but that had not yet reached the fingerprint size (`offset` + `length`) before the rollback. Earlier versions do not understand the tracking information used for those files. After rollback, if one of those files later reaches the fingerprint size, Filebeat treats it as a new file and reads it from the beginning. Any unused registry entries remain until `clean_inactive` removes them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The risk is limited to files that the newer Filebeat version had started reading, but that had not yet reached the fingerprint size (`offset` + `length`) before the rollback. 

Earlier Filebeat versions do not understand the tracking information used for those files. After rollback, if one of those files later reaches the fingerprint size, Filebeat treats it as a new file and reads it from the beginning. Any unused registry entries remain until `clean_inactive` removes them.
```

Files that had already reached the fingerprint size before rollback are not affected.
::::

> You don't need to configure `rotation.external.strategy: copytruncate` when using the `fingerprint` file identity. Because the fingerprint follows the file content, the input detects copytruncate rotation on its own: after the active file is copied to its rotated name and then truncated, the rotated file keeps its identity and offset, while the truncated active file is picked up as a new file. If you do set `rotation.external.strategy: copytruncate` with the `fingerprint` file identity, it is unnecessary and is ignored, and Enhanced Fingerprint stays enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You don't need to configure `rotation.external.strategy: copytruncate` when using the `fingerprint` file identity. Because the fingerprint follows the file content, the input detects copytruncate rotation on its own: after the active file is copied to its rotated name and then truncated, the rotated file keeps its identity and offset, while the truncated active file is picked up as a new file. If you do set `rotation.external.strategy: copytruncate` with the `fingerprint` file identity, it is ignored, and enhanced fingerprint remains enabled.
```
